   Tools, Research, Reports & Guides
   Tree Equity Score
   Ensuring tree cover in cities is equitably distributed
   Photo: Rob Crandall / Shutterstock
   Using Data Tools to Create Tree Equity

   The story is the same in nearly every city across the United States. With
   few exceptions, trees are sparse in socioeconomically disadvantaged and
   neighborhoods of color and more prominent in wealthier, whiter
   neighborhoods. Redlining policies, dating back to the 1930s, helped
--
   American Forests is focused on addressing this inequity by focusing
   resources in neighborhoods of highest need. It’s our moral imperative to
   do so, given how many life-saving and quality of life benefits trees
   provide people. That is why we are working to create Tree Equity, which is
   about ensuring that all people experience the benefits of trees. One of
   the ways we are doing this is with our Tree Equity Score tool. It provides
   a social-equity-focused narrative, goals and a guide path for building
--
   See Your City's Tree Equity Score
   What Do the Scores Mean?
   Each score indicates whether there are enough trees in a neighborhood for
   everyone to experience the health, economic and climate benefits that
   trees provide. Scores are based on tree canopy, surface temperature,
   income, employment, race, age, language and health factors. A
   0-to-100-point system makes it easy to understand how a community fares.
--
   U.S. congressional leaders and everybody in between. And it can be used by
   a variety of sectors, such as urban forestry and public health, given the
   role trees play in slowing climate change and improving health and
   wellbeing. Some of the uses are:

   Advocacy
   Make the case for federal, state and local policies, programs and funding
   related to protecting existing trees and planting new trees. The Tucson
   City Council used the methodology from Tree Equity Score to create a
   mapping tool for making decisions about how to invest in green
   infrastructure, such as tree planting and green stormwater basin
   installations.
   City Planning
--
   Forestry Programs
   Use the scores to take a fresh look at an existing urban forestry program.
   Does the program prioritize planting trees in low-scoring neighborhoods?
   Scores can help track progress related to urban forestry programs and
   initiatives.
--
     * FAQs

   1220 L Street, NW,
   Suite 750
   Washington, DC 20005
