
   Trees grow, reproduce, and respond to their environment. Like all plants,
   trees manufacture their food through photosynthesis. Trees are in the
   family of woody plants which have cambium, a special layer of cells that
   allow the tree to increase in girth and are self supporting with a single
   stem. Trees are perennials and can live for many years. The oldest known
   tree species is the Great Basin bristlecone pine, which is believed to
   reach ages of over 5,000 years old!

   Food for trees is produced through a complex system starting with the
   leaves. Leaves produce sugar as a result of photosynthesis which combines
   carbon dioxide and sunlight. The by-product of photosynthesis that Trees
   produce is oxygen—a vital resource for other living organisms. Sugar that
   is produced runs down through the tree, under the bark down the trunk and
   to the roots of the tree. The sugar combines at the roots with minerals
   and water in the ground to move back up the tree trunk and under the bark
   back to the leaves to which starts the cycle of photosynthesis again.
   Along the way, minerals, water and sugar stimulate the growth and
   development of the tree or assist in its reproduction.

Tree Types
--
   Trees can divided into two categories: deciduous and coniferous.

   Deciduous trees are also known as broadleaf trees because the leaves are
   generally larger and wider than those of conifers. The larger leaf size
   means a greater surface area for photosynthesis, but it also means the
   leaf is too fragile to withstand winter conditions. Therefore, most
   deciduous trees drop their leaves in autumn.

   Coniferous trees keep their leaves throughout the year, shedding only the
   oldest leaves. Usually these leaves are lower down on the tree and do not
   receive as much sunlight as newly developed leaves higher up. Some of the
   best-known members of the conifer family are pines, spruces, firs, and
--
   roots

   The crown of the tree is made up of the leaves and branches.

   The trunk of the tree supports the crown and serves as a highway for food
   made in the leaves to travel to the roots and for water and nutrients from
   the roots to travel to the leaves.
--
   The root collar is located at the base of the trunk just above where the
   roots join. Also called the root flare, due to the flared shape on some
   tree species, the root collar must always remain above ground when
   planting and mulching.

   The roots of the tree support the trunk and crown, and also anchor the
   tree in the soil. They serve as a storage facility during the winter for
   the food produced by the leaves during the growing season. The roots also
   absorb water and nutrients from the soil for use by the tree.

   Many wildlife species depend on trees for food, water, cover, or places to
   raise their young. You can help wildlife by planting trees and creating
   habitat in your community!

--
   Top 10 Trees for Wildlife

   Discover some of our favorite native trees and the benefits they provide
   for a whole host of species.

--
   Support Trees for Wildlife™

   Help protect wildlife one tree at a time. Select purchases support our
   work to help people learn about, plant, and care for trees for wildlife.

Get Involved
