   Pop-out player

   Some important tree species native to the northwestern states in the U.S.
   are no longer growing well because of climate change.

   As conditions change in states such as Washington, Oregon and California,
   trees such as the Douglas fir, Western red cedar, giant sequoia and
   redwood may need to move -- with the help of humans.

   Some of the trees do not do well when temperatures rise. Others suffer
   during times of drought. The goal is to move the trees to areas where the
   climate might more suitable.

   Forest scientists are generally in favor of moving the trees so they do
   not die out. However, not all of the scientists agree on the best way to
   do it.

   There are three ways to move trees: assisted population migration,
   assisted species migration and range expansion.

--
   sequoias from the Redwood Mountain Grove. (AP Photo/Gary Kazanjian, File)

   Assisted population migration involves scientists moving a tree’s seeds
   within its current growing range. Assisted species migration involves
   scientists moving a species far from its existing area. In this case, that
   would include moving redwoods and sequoias from California to Washington.

   The third way, range expansion, moves trees just outside their current
   growing range. Each way has different results for the trees and other
   animals and insects that depend on the trees.

   Michael Case is a forest ecologist at the Nature Conservancy in Virginia.
--
   He said the risk of failure increases “whenever you plant something in an
   area where it is not locally found.” He said the risk is not only to the
   trees. There is also the risk of causing problems in the ecosystem.

   Case is working on an assisted population migration program with Douglas
   fir and Western hemlock trees. He is testing whether the trees, originally
   from drier parts of the northwest, can do well in western Washington where
   there is a drought. His organization believes that assisted population
--
   Douglas Tallamy is a professor of entomology and wildlife ecology at the
   University of Delaware. He said one worry about species migration is that
   local caterpillars might not eat the leaves of trees that are new to the
   area. The caterpillars serve as food for birds and other animals, so they
   must have a good food source.

   FILE - Douglas fir trees that died as a result of insect damage following
   heat stress are visible in the Willamette National Forest, Ore., Friday,
   Oct. 27, 2023. (AP Photo/Amanda Loman)
   FILE - Douglas fir trees that died as a result of insect damage following
   heat stress are visible in the Willamette National Forest, Ore., Friday,
   Oct. 27, 2023. (AP Photo/Amanda Loman)

   Although the concerns are documented, the city of Portland, Oregon, is
   working on a species migration project for 11 tree species. The project
   includes three oak trees: California black oak, canyon live oak and
   interior live oak. Tallamy said oak trees are among the most important in
   North America. “When you move them out of range,” he said, “the things
   that are adapted to eating them no longer have access to them.”
--
   through the use of seeds or parts of another plant.

   That organization is planting non-local trees around the Seattle,
   Washington area in hopes that they will start growing in places where
   Western red cedar, Western hemlock and big leaf maple are having trouble.

   FILE - A dead branch is visible on a Western Red Cedar tree in the
   Willamette National Forest, Ore., Oct. 27, 2023. (AP Photo/Amanda Loman)
   FILE - A dead branch is visible on a Western Red Cedar tree in the
   Willamette National Forest, Ore., Oct. 27, 2023. (AP Photo/Amanda Loman)

   David Milarch is the leader of a group in Michigan that supports keeping
   old trees alive. It is called Archangel Ancient Tree Archive. Milarch said
   the hope is to permit redwoods and sequoias to grow in areas to the north.
   The hope is not to replace native trees.

   He said his group hopes the trees “will still be here in 100 to 200 years
   and not join the list of trees that are going extinct.”

   The organizations that are not practicing widely accepted methods for
--
   activity that has been tested with high standards.

   He said all of the ideas about how to move trees should follow experiments
   that have already produced strong results.

--
   migration –n. the movement of something to a new place

   range –n. the usual area of land covered by a plant or tree (in this case)

   ecologist –n. a person who studies living things and their environment
