    6. Christmas Tree Trivia and Facts

   The history of Christmas trees has many roots, ranging from the use of
   evergreens in ancient Egypt and Rome to the German traditions of candlelit
   trees that made its way to America in the 1800s. Discover the history of
   the Christmas tree, from the earliest winter solstice celebrations to
   Queen Victoria’s decorating habits and the annual lighting of the
   Rockefeller Center tree in New York City.

How Did Christmas Trees Start?

   Long before the advent of Christianity, plants and trees that remained
   green all year had a special meaning for people in the winter. Just as
   people today decorate their homes during the festive season with pine,
   spruce, and fir trees, many ancient peoples hung evergreen boughs over
   their doors and windows. In many countries it was believed that evergreens
   would keep away witches, ghosts, evil spirits, and illness.
--
   triumph of life over death.

     Did you know? Christmas trees are grown in all 50 states including
     Hawaii and Alaska.

--
Christmas Trees From Germany

   Germany is credited with starting the Christmas tree tradition—as we now
   know it—by the 16th century  when sources record devout Christians
   bringing decorated trees into their homes. Some built Christmas pyramids
   of wood and decorated them with evergreens and candles if wood was scarce.

   It is a widely held belief that Martin Luther, the 16th-century Protestant
   reformer, first added lighted candles to a tree. According to a common
   version of the story, walking home one winter evening, Luther was awed by
   the stars twinkling amidst evergreens. To recapture the scene for his
   family, he erected a tree in the main room and wired its branches with
   lighted candles.

Who Brought Christmas Trees to America?

   Most 19th-century Americans found Christmas trees an oddity. The first
   records of Christmas trees being cut for display comes from the 1820s in
   Pennsylvania’s German community, although trees may have been a tradition
   there even earlier. As early as 1747, Moravian Germans in Pennsylvania had
   a community tree in the form of a wooden pyramid decorated with candles.
   But, as late as the 1840s, Christmas trees were seen as pagan symbols and
   not accepted by most Americans.

   It is not surprising that, like many other festive Christmas customs, the
   tree was adopted so late in America. New England’s first Puritan leaders
   viewed Christmas celebrations as unholy. The pilgrims’s second governor,
   William Bradford, wrote that he tried hard to stamp out “pagan mockery” of
--
   Archive/Getty Images
   An illustration from a December 1848 edition of the Illustrated London
   News shows Queen Victoria and her family surrounding a Christmas tree.

   In 1846, the popular royals, Queen Victoria and her German Prince, Albert,
   were sketched in the Illustrated London News standing with their children
   around a Christmas tree. Unlike the previous royal family, Victoria was
   very popular with her subjects, and what was done at court immediately
   became fashionable—not only in Britain, but with fashion-conscious East
   Coast American Society. The Christmas tree had arrived.

   By the 1890s Christmas ornaments were arriving from Germany and Christmas
   tree popularity was on the rise around the U.S. It was noted that
   Europeans used small trees about four feet in height, while Americans
   liked their Christmas trees to extend from floor to ceiling.

   The early 20th century saw Americans decorating their trees mainly with
   homemade ornaments, while many German Americans continued to use apples,
   nuts and marzipan cookies. Stringed popcorn was added to trees' decoration
   after being dyed bright colors and interlaced with berries and nuts.
   Electricity brought about Christmas lights, making it possible for
   Christmas trees to glow for days on end. With this, Christmas trees began
   to appear in town squares across the country and having a Christmas tree
   in the home became an American tradition.

--
Rockefeller Center Christmas Tree

   The Rockefeller Center tree is located at Rockefeller Center, west of
   Fifth Avenue from 47th through 51st Streets in New York City.

   The Rockefeller Center Christmas Tree dates back to the Depression era,
   with the first tree placed in 1931. It was a small unadorned tree set up
   by construction workers at the center of the construction site. Two years
   later, another tree was placed there, this time with lights.

   These days, the giant Rockefeller Center tree is laden with over 50,000
   Christmas lights. The tallest tree displayed at Rockefeller Center arrived
   in 1999. It was a Norway Spruce that measured 100 feet tall and hailed
   from Killingworth, Connecticut.
--
   Christmas Trees in Canada
   German settlers began migrating to Canada from the United States in the
   1700s. They brought Canada’s first Christmas trees and, in later
   generations, gingerbread houses and Advent calendars. When Queen
   Victoria’s German husband, Prince Albert, put up a Christmas tree at
   Windsor Castle in 1848, Christmas trees became a widely popular tradition
   throughout England, the United States and Canada.

   Christmas Trees in Mexico
   In most Mexican homes the principal holiday adornment is el Nacimiento
   (Nativity scene). However, a decorated Christmas tree may be incorporated
   in the Nacimiento or set up elsewhere in the home. As purchase of a
   natural pine represents a luxury commodity to most Mexican families, the
   typical arbolito (little tree) is often an artificial one, a bare branch
   cut from a copal tree (Bursera microphylla) or some type of shrub
   collected from the countryside.

--

   Christmas Trees in Greenland
   Since icy Greenland lacks large native forests, most Christmas trees are
   imported. They are decorated with candles and bright ornaments.

   Christmas Trees in Guatemala
   The Christmas tree has joined the Nacimiento as a popular ornament because
   of the large German population in Guatemala.

   Christmas Trees in Brazil
   Although Christmas falls during the summer in most of Brazil, sometimes
   pine trees are decorated with little pieces of cotton that represent
   falling snow.

   Christmas Trees in Ireland
   Christmas trees are bought anytime in December and decorated with colored
   lights, tinsel, and baubles. Some people favor the angel on top of the
   tree, others the star. The house is decorated with garlands, candles,
   holly, and ivy. Wreaths and mistletoe are hung on the door.

   Christmas Trees in Sweden
   Most people buy Christmas trees well before Christmas Eve, but it’s not
   common to take the tree inside and decorate it until just a few days
   before. Evergreen trees are decorated with stars, sunbursts and snowflakes
   made from straw. Other decorations include colorful wooden animals and
   straw centerpieces.

   Christmas Trees in Norway
   Norwegians often take a trip to the woods to select a Christmas tree, a
   trip that their grandfathers probably did not make. The Christmas tree was
   not introduced into Norway from Germany until the latter half of the 19th
   century; to the country districts it came even later. Many families
   decorate their trees on ‘Little Christmas Eve’—December 23. A Norwegian
   ritual known as “circling the Christmas tree” follows, where everyone
   joins hands to form a ring around the tree and then walks around it
   singing carols.

--
   Christians, Christmas is the most popular holiday in the Ukraine. During
   the Christmas season, which also includes New Year’s Day, people decorate
   fir trees and have parties.

   Christmas Trees in Spain
--
   of the triangular sides. The shelves above the manger scene have small
   gifts of fruit, candy, and presents. The ceppo is likely related to older
   ‘tree of light’ traditions linked to Christmas trees in other countries.
   Some houses even have a ceppo for each child in the family.

--

   As mentioned above, some Lutheran traditions credit Martin Luther with
   placing the first lighted candles on a Christmas tree.

   Another legend says that in the early 16th century, people in Germany
   combined two customs that had been practiced in different countries around
   the globe. The Paradise tree (a fir tree decorated with apples)
   represented the Tree of Knowledge in the Garden of Eden. The Christmas
   Light, a small, pyramid-like frame, usually decorated with glass balls,
   tinsel and a candle on top, was a symbol of the birth of Christ as the
   Light of the World. Changing the tree’s apples to tinsel balls and cookies
   and combining this new tree with the light placed on top, the Germans
   created the tree that many of us know today.

   The modern Tannenbaum (Christmas trees) is traditionally decorated in
   secret with lights, tinsel and ornaments by parents and then lit and
   revealed on Christmas Eve with cookies, nuts and gifts under its branches.

   Christmas Trees in South Africa
   Christmas is a summer holiday in South Africa. Although Christmas trees
   are not common, windows are often draped with sparkling cotton wool and
   tinsel.
--
   Saudia Arabia have to celebrate Christmas privately in their homes.
   Christmas lights are generally not tolerated. Most families place their
   Christmas trees somewhere inconspicuous.

   Christmas Trees in Philippines
   Fresh pine trees are too expensive for many Filipinos, so handmade trees
   in an array of colors and sizes are often used. Star lanterns, or parol,
   appear everywhere in December. They are made from bamboo sticks, covered
--

   Christmas Trees in China
   More than 80 percent of the world’s artificial Christmas trees are made in
   China, but a much smaller portion of Chinese people celebrate Christmas as
   a religious holiday. Those who do often put up artificial trees—“trees of
   light” decorated with paper chains and lanterns.

   Christmas Trees in Japan
   For most of the Japanese who celebrate Christmas, it’s purely a secular
   holiday devoted to the love of their children. Christmas trees are
   decorated with small toys, dolls, paper ornaments, gold paper fans and
   lanterns, and wind chimes. Miniature candles are also put among the tree
   branches. One of the most popular ornaments is the origami crane. Japanese
   children have exchanged thousands of folded paper “birds of peace” with
--
Christmas Tree Trivia and Facts

   Christmas trees have been sold commercially in the United States since
   about 1850.

--

   Between 1887-1933 a fishing schooner called the Christmas Ship would tie
   up at the Clark Street bridge and sell spruce and pine trees from Michigan
   to Chicagoans.

   The much-disputed title for the tallest living Christmas tree likely goes
   to an allegedly 160-foot Sitka Spruce in Ferndale, California.

   Franklin Pierce, the 14th president, is often credited with bringing the
   Christmas tree tradition to the White House in the early 1850s.

   In 1923, President Calvin Coolidge started the National Christmas Tree
--

   Since 1966, the National Christmas Tree Association has given a Christmas
   tree to the President and first family.

   Most Christmas trees are cut weeks before they get to a retail outlet.

   In 1912, what were likely the first major community Christmas trees in the
   United States were erected in Boston, New York City and Hartford, Conn.

   Christmas trees generally take six to eight years to mature.

   Christmas trees are grown in all 50 states including Hawaii and Alaska.

   Ninety-eight percent of all natural Christmas trees are grown on farms.

   More than 1,000,000 acres of land have been planted with Christmas trees.

   On average, as many as 1,500 Christmas trees are planted per acre.

   You should never burn your Christmas tree in the fireplace. It can
   contribute to creosote buildup.

   Other types of trees such as cherry and hawthorns were used as Christmas
   trees in the past.

   Thomas Edison’s assistants came up with the idea of electric lights for
   Christmas trees.

   In 1963, the National Christmas Tree was not lit until December 22nd
--
   assassination of President John F. Kennedy.

   Teddy Roosevelt banned the Christmas tree from the White House, possibly
   for environmental reasons—but his young son snuck a tree into the house
   anyway.

   In the first week, a tree in your home will consume as much as three
   quarts of water per day.

--
   tinsel.

   The best-selling Christmas trees include the Scotch Pine, Douglas Fir,
   Fraser Fir, Balsam Fir and Blue Spruce.

--

   URL
           https://www.history.com/topics/christmas/history-of-christmas-trees

   Date Accessed
