
                                 Environment |
   Eucalyptus are one of the state’s most controversial trees. A Monterey Bay
                reserve may be a model for how to replace them.

The Elkhorn Slough Reserve is pioneering methods to restore native habitats

   An arborist slowly limbs a eucalyptus tree with a chainsaw from the top
   down to avoid felling the massive trunks onto nearby houses in Santa Cruz.
   (Photo by Alix Soliman)
   An arborist slowly limbs a eucalyptus tree with a chainsaw from the top
   down to avoid felling the massive trunks onto nearby houses in Santa Cruz.
   (Photo by Alix Soliman)
--
   a.m.

   Fresh tree stumps the size of dining tables line the road at the Elkhorn
   Slough Reserve, the remains of hulking eucalyptus trees that blanketed the
   ground in a thick layer of aromatic wood chips. Nothing grows in the
   wreckage, but about 40 yards away, a grove of young oak trees flourishes.

   Mary Paul, a stewardship associate at the reserve just east of Moss
--
   the oaks now stand, staff removed a 13-acre grove of eucalyptus in the
   1990s and planted well over 10,000 acorns. In a few decades, the roadside
   site where eucalyptus trees were cut down this summer should match the
   restored oak savanna beside it.

   Paul hopes the restoration efforts at Elkhorn Slough will help quell
   public opposition to the removal of the eucalyptus — an invasive tree
   native to Australia that has become a California icon, and a shelter for
   migrating birds and Monarch butterflies, but must be removed because they
--
   Mary Paul, stewardship associate at Elkhorn Slough Reserve, explains how
   the oak behind her grew tall and spindly to compete for sunlight with
   eucalyptus trees that have since been cut to stumps. (Photo by Alix
   Soliman)Mary Paul, stewardship associate at Elkhorn Slough Reserve,
   explains how the oak behind her grew tall and spindly to compete for
   sunlight with eucalyptus trees that have since been cut to stumps. (Photo
   by Alix Soliman) 

--
   dealing with thousands of tons of highly flammable wood.

   Also called blue gum, eucalyptus is a fast-growing tree native to
   Tasmania, an island state south of the Australian mainland. During the
   California Gold Rush of the 1800s, they were planted for windbreaks, fuel
--

   At the Elkhorn Slough Reserve — home to a vast array of birds, marine
   mammals, amphibians and fish — thirsty eucalyptus trees leave the wetlands
   more vulnerable to drought and problems with water quality. To save this
   vital habitat, the reserve has made removing the trees a priority in areas
   where they are doing harm.

   But some community members have objected. In 2015, when the Elkhorn Slough
   Reserve proposed chopping down more than 1,200 trees across 50 acres by
   2025, staff received angry comments from locals, many concerned that
   important Monarch butterfly and bird habitat would disappear.

   Similar objections have erupted around felling other eucalyptus groves,
   such as the removal of 31 trees on private land around Rodeo Creek in
   Santa Cruz, which was just completed. “I had no idea how much wildlife
   lived in the eucalyptus before I moved here,” said Santa Cruz resident
--
   were going to leave active bird nesting and butterfly nesting habitat
   intact, in a part of the reserve where there’s a huge grove of eucalyptus
   trees,” Paul said, pointing to a dense stand in the distance, beside two
   stacks of the Moss Landing Power Plant. “We’re not going to remove that at
   all, ever.”

   At another restoration site where eucalyptus trees were downed in August
   2022, native plants sprout from holes in a foot-thick layer of eucalyptus
   wood chips. The scene challenges a common belief that eucalyptus is
--
   “There was a historic stream that was present on this site that hadn’t
   really been seen very much when the eucalyptus were here,” Paul said.
   After the trees were felled, the stream resurfaced during last winter’s
   storms.

--
       Mary Paul, stewardship associate at Elkhorn Slough Reserve, explains
       how the oak behind her grew tall and spindly to compete for sunlight
       with eucalyptus trees that have since been cut to stumps. (Photo by
       Alix Soliman)

     * An arborist slowly limbs a eucalyptus tree with a chainsaw...

       An arborist slowly limbs a eucalyptus tree with a chainsaw from the
       top down to avoid felling the massive trunks onto nearby houses in
       Santa Cruz. (Photo by Alix Soliman)
--
       (Photo by Alix Soliman)

     * A eucalyptus tree grove at Rancho Loop trail in Garland...

       A eucalyptus tree grove at Rancho Loop trail in Garland Park in Carmel
       Valley. (Photo courtesy of Monterey Peninsula Regional Park District)

--
   from the bottom-up into ash, which would release much more carbon into the
   air. They then buried some of the charcoal as part of an effort to restore
   a salt marsh, locking up the carbon the eucalyptus trees had sucked from
   the air over their lifetime.

