   & Nature Geography & Travel Arts & Culture Money Videos
   [ Submit ] [ Submit ]
   tree
   Table of Contents
   tree
   [ Submit ]
   Table of Contents
     * Introduction
     * Classification of trees
          * Phylogenetic classifications
          * Ecological and evolutionary classification
          * Popular classifications
     * The importance of trees
          * Economic importance
          * Trees of special interest
     * Tree structure and growth
          * General features of the tree body
          * The anatomy and organization of wood
          * Growth ring formation
--
   References & Edit History Related Topics
   Images & Videos
   giant sequoias tree fern cycads ginkgo leaves monkey puzzle tree cherry
   tree deciduous trees Joshua tree Eswatini: Highveld region Geographic
   distribution of the world's forests by categories of wood
   [ Submit ] [ Submit ]
   For Students
   Douglas fir trees
   tree summary
   Quizzes
   Spreading oak tree in summer. (green, leaves, deciduous, shade)
   Trees: Giants Holding the Sky
   Field of baobab trees, Madagascar. (bottle tree)
   Trees of the World
   Venus's-flytrap. Venus's-flytrap (Dionaea muscipula) one of the best known
--
   Urtica dioica, often called common nettle or stinging nettle
   7 Dangerous Plants You Should Never Touch
   European beech trees (Fagus sylvatica) in autumn. Note: Oak tree far left.
   Fall colors
   Why Do Leaves Fall in Autumn?
   Majestic sequoias in Sequoia National Park. (trees; sunlight; forest;
   conifers; sequoia tree)
   Saving the World’s Largest Trees
   Plant seedlings emerging from rich fertile soil
--
   Animals & Nature

                                      tree

   plant
--
   Facebook Twitter
   URL
   https://www.britannica.com/plant/tree
   Give Feedback
   External Websites
--
   Articles from Britannica Encyclopedias for elementary and high school
   students.
     * tree - Children's Encyclopedia (Ages 8-11)
     * tree - Student Encyclopedia (Ages 11 and up)
   Print
   print Print
--
   Facebook Twitter
   URL
   https://www.britannica.com/plant/tree
   Feedback [ Submit ]
   External Websites
--
   Articles from Britannica Encyclopedias for elementary and high school
   students.
     * tree - Children's Encyclopedia (Ages 8-11)
     * tree - Student Encyclopedia (Ages 11 and up)
   Written by
   Lillian M. Weber
--
           root
           bonsai
           Moon tree

   (Show more)
   See all related content →

   tree, woody plant that regularly renews its growth (perennial). Most
   plants classified as trees have a single self-supporting trunk containing
   woody tissues, and in most species the trunk produces secondary limbs,
   called branches.

   To many, the word tree evokes images of such ancient, powerful, and
   majestic structures as oaks and sequoias, the latter being among the most
   massive and longest-living organisms in the world. Although the majority
   of Earth’s terrestrial biomass is represented by trees, the fundamental
   importance of these seemingly ubiquitous plants for the very existence and
   diversity of life on Earth is perhaps not fully appreciated. The biosphere
   is dependent on the metabolism, death, and recycling of plants, especially
   trees. Their vast trunks and root systems store carbon dioxide, move
   water, and produce oxygen that is released into the atmosphere. The
   organic matter of the soil develops primarily from decayed leaves, twigs,
   branches, roots, and fallen trees, all of which recycle nitrogen, carbon,
   oxygen, and other important nutrients. There are few organisms as
   important as trees for maintaining Earth’s ecology.

   This article discusses the historical, popular, and botanical
   classifications of trees, their evolution, their importance to humans, and
   their general structure and patterns of growth. For more information on
   the three botanical groups that include trees, see fern (e.g., the tree
   ferns), gymnosperm (including conifers), and angiosperm (the flowering
   plants). For general information on plants, see plant.

Classification of trees

   The ancient Greeks developed a classification about 300 bce in which
   plants were grouped according to their general form—that is, as trees,
   shrubs, undershrubs, and vines. This classification was used for almost
   1,000 years. Modern classifications of plants attempt to assign a plant to
--
   that are shown no matter how distantly plants are related.

   Spreading oak tree in summer. (green, leaves, deciduous, shade)
   Britannica Quiz
   Trees: Giants Holding the Sky
--

   Trees are represented in each of the major groups of the vascular plants:
   pteridophytes (seedless vascular plants that include the tree ferns),
   gymnosperms (cycads, ginkgoes, and conifers), and angiosperms (flowering
   plants).

   tree fern[ Submit ]
   tree fern
   Tree fern (Cyathea medullaris).(more)

   Although tree ferns account for only a small percentage of ferns, many are
   conspicuous members of a forest, attaining heights of 7 to 10 metres (23
   to 33 feet); some are 15, 18, or occasionally 24 metres tall (49, 59, or
   79 feet). These graceful trees, which are natives of humid montane forests
   in the tropics and subtropics and of warm temperate regions of the
   Southern Hemisphere, have huge lacy leaves; they are the remnants of a
--
   ginkgo leaves[ Submit ]
   ginkgo leaves
   The leathery fan-shaped leaves of a ginkgo tree (Ginkgo biloba), a
   gymnosperm.(more)

--
   Ginkgophyta. It is a relic that has been preserved in cultivation around
   ancient Buddhist temples in China and planted elsewhere as an ornamental
   since the mid-18th century; the tree probably no longer exists in a wild
   state.

   monkey puzzle tree[ Submit ]
   monkey puzzle tree
   Cones and branches of a monkey puzzle tree (Araucaria araucana), native to
   central and southern Chile and western Argentina.(more)

   Conifers (division Pinophyta) are the largest group of gymnosperms and
   include trees and shrubs in 7 extant families and 545 species. Familiar
   representatives are araucarias, cedars, cypresses, Douglas firs, firs,
   hemlocks, junipers, larches, pines, podocarps, redwoods, spruces, and
   yews.

   cherry tree[ Submit ]
   cherry tree
   Cherry tree in bloom with white blossoms.(more)

   Dominating Earth’s present flora are the angiosperms, with about 300,000
   species, among which are the majority of the world’s trees. Angiosperms
   are sometimes divided on the basis of a group of characteristics into two
   major groups: the monocotyledons and the eudicotyledons. The most numerous
   of the monocotyledonous trees are palms; others include agaves, aloes,
   dracaenas, screw pines, and yuccas. By far the greatest number of tree
   species are eudicotyledons; they are represented by such familiar groups
   as birches, elms, hollies, maples, oaks, poplars, ashes, and willows.
--
Ecological and evolutionary classification

   The tree is not an immutable biological category but rather a human
   concept based on visual criteria. Perhaps a general definition would
   describe a tree as a perennial woody plant that develops along a single
   main trunk to a height of at least 4.5 metres (15 feet) at maturity. This
   may be contrasted with a shrub, which might be loosely defined as a woody
--
   in one area of the world might not necessarily do so in other regions,
   since a variety of stresses shape the habit of the mature plant. Thus, a
   given woody species may be a tree in one set of habitats within its range
   and a shrub elsewhere. For example, the spruce and fir may thrive in the
   tree form at the base of a mountain but assume a shrub form near the
   mountaintop, the variation due principally to stresses exerted by such
   environmental conditions as altitude, temperature, and oxygen tension.

   As seen in the section above, trees are found among many plant families
   that also include shrubs and herbs, so that the concept of tree is not a
   phylogenetic one. Further, there is no clear consensus as to whether the
   tree form is the advanced or primitive condition. Some paleobotanists
   suggest that trees are the most primitive members within these plant
   families. However, tree forms are found in all the vascular plants, from
   the club mosses and ferns to the gymnosperms and angiosperms. It is
   furthermore true that, among the flowering plants, trees are found not
   only among the most primitive members (order Magnoliales) but also among
   the more specialized, or advanced, members, such as the roses (order
--

   Consequently, from both a taxonomic and a phylogenetic perspective, the
   tree is an artificial category. On an ecological basis, however, the tree
   can be recognized as a natural construct, as it represents an adaptive
   strategy by many different taxa to exploit and dominate the habitat above
--
   plant’s form to allow specialization of function. This requires
   physiological and morphological complexity as well as biological
   optimization. If all the tissues of massive tree trunks were alive, for
   example, the physiological cost of maintaining these structures in the
   living state would be enormous and probably unattainable. An elegant
