       Tweet
   Navigation Menu
   Thumbnail image for Join the Weather E-tree Program to Plant Trees
   Featured

                 Join the Weather E-tree Program to Plant Trees

   written byDave KaneApr 29, 2022
--
   Start is also helping you give back to the planet. By using Weather from
   Microsoft Start, you can help contribute to a greener, more sustainable
   Earth by growing an E-tree!

   Weather from Microsoft Start offers hyper-local, up-to-the-minute
--
   to keep you constantly informed about the weather where it matters to you
   most. With a tool this powerful, the challenge is helping people discover
   all the information available to them – to help, we launched “E-trees.”  

   This fun, guided, interactive experience is designed to reward users for
--
   join, users will earn points through simple daily tasks – things like
   checking precipitation, temperature, or wind in your area. Progress is
   easy to track as you earn points and grow your very own E-tree! 

   As your E-tree grows, Microsoft will work to turn it into a real tree. To
   make this happen, we’ve partnered with the Eden Restoration Projects, a
   non-profit committed to restoring forests and protecting ecosystems in
   high-risk or unstable areas. 

   It only takes a few easy steps to get started and plant your E-tree – just
   launch Weather from the Windows 10 or Windows 11 taskbar, from the Weather
   card on the feed in a new tab in Edge, or by heading to
--
   Collecting heat power

   Once you sign in and join, you’ll be able to give your E-tree a unique
   name. Then, you can start nurturing your tree by collecting energy points
   right away. Each time you launch Weather and click on your tree, you’ll
   see suggested tasks and new ways to get points daily while learning more
   about the weather where you live or in another area you care about – like
--
   keeping track of extreme weather somewhere you have family or friends.

   Just like a real tree, an E-tree needs water, air, and sunlight.
   Conveniently, Weather from Microsoft Start can deliver meaningful
   information about each of these. The site includes detailed maps with
--
   break” to make the most of the sunshine. 

   Once your tree reaches 10,000 points, you’ll receive an E-tree certificate
   and the Eden Restoration Projects will plant a real tree in the Mwamdudu
   site, just outside the bustling city of Mombasa, Kenya. You can even see
   how fast other people are their E-trees!

   E-Trees bring together the best weather tools with a fun experience, plus
   the chance to make the world a greener place – one tree at a time. 

     * Microsoft Shopping:Terms and Details
