   by Michael Kuhns, Extension Forestry Specialist

   What is a tree? How are trees different from grasses, sunflowers,
   dandelions, and other types of plants? And what do trees have in common
   with shrubs and woody vines? The answers to these questions seem obvious
   at first. But unless you are a botanist you may find that the answers
   don't come easily. Let's look a little closer to find some common
   characteristics of trees, shrubs, and woody vines.

   Trees, shrubs, and vines belong to many different plant families. Some are
   closely related, like ponderosa pine and limber pine. Others are not
   closely related at all, like eastern red cedar and silver maple. However,
   trees, shrubs, and vines all have one thing that separates them from the
   rest of the plant world: a woody stem that is perennial or that lives for
   many years. Grasses and certain other plants may be perennial, but their
--
   Let's look at each of the parts of a woody plant's stem and see how they
   are put together and how they grow larger year after year. If you could
   tunnel into a woody plant's stem, whether the trunk of a tree or a twig on
   a shrub, you would first encounter bark, then cambium, and finally wood or
   xylem. Bark is the outer covering on the trunk, twigs, and woody roots.
--
   New bark is constantly being made on the inside and pushed out. This is
   why older trunks usually have rough outer bark that peels or flakes away.
   Bark is highly variable, though. Young trees of most species have fairly
   smooth bark. To see what a tree's bark looked like when it was young, look
   at the young bark on upper branches and twigs.

   White Oak Cross section

   Cross section of white oak tree trunk:

   (A) outer bark (dry dead tissue)
--
   called the cambium. This layer repeatedly divides, first in then out, to
   form all of the new wood and bark. Wood, or xylem, makes up everything
   inside the cambium on tree trunks, branches, twigs, and woody roots. Wood
   is made up of fibers for strength and hollow tubes of different sizes.
   These tubes are like straws that conduct water from the roots to the
--
   is responsible for all water and mineral movement through the stem.

   Ponderosa PineMost people would agree that this ponderosa pine is a tree,
   but...

   Canyon Maple tree...the canyon maple and Utah junipers in this picture
   might be considered shrubs. Given enough time to grow, all of them should
   meet the definition of a tree.

   So trees, shrubs, and woody vines all have woody, perennial stems. What
   makes them different from one another? The distinction between trees and
   shrubs is not always clear. We all know that a large cottonwood is a tree
   and a creeping juniper is a shrub, but there are many shrub-like trees and
   tree-like shrubs. Though no scientific definition exists to separate trees
   and shrubs, a useful definition for a tree is a woody plant having one
   erect perennial stem (trunk) at least three inches in diameter at a point
   4-1/2 feet above the ground, a definitely formed crown of foliage, and a
   mature height of at least 13 feet. This definition works fine, though some
   trees may have more than one stem and young trees obviously don't meet the
   size criteria. A shrub can then be defined as a woody plant with several
   perennial stems that may be erect or may lay close to the ground. It will
