   _____________________

                                      tree

   View article for:
--
   

     * tree
     * tree
     * plant: cone
     * flowering tree
     * tree
     * tree
     * tree habitat: koala
     * tree
   ×
   ×
--
     * Read Aloud: Fast Forward (Subscriber Feature)

   A linden tree has large, spreading branches.Evergreen trees keep their
   needlelike leaves year-round.Trees are tall, woody plants. They usually
   have a stem called a trunk. Trees are some of the largest and oldest
   living things on Earth. Some trees live for hundreds or even thousands of
   years. There are more than 80,000 species, or types, of tree. Well-known
   trees include birches, firs, maples, palms, and pines.

    Groups of Trees
--

   Plants called conifers have cones that contain the plant's seeds.Some
   trees have flowers in the spring.The Lawson cypress and the English elm
   look different because they are two different types of tree.…Scientists
   divide trees into groups based on how they reproduce. Some trees reproduce
   with spores, or particles that grow into new plants. They are called tree
   ferns. Most trees reproduce with seeds. Some seed-bearing trees grow their
   seeds in cones. They are called conifers. Most seed-bearing trees grow
   their seeds in fruits or pods. They are known as broad-leaved or flowering
   trees.

   Scientists also group trees based on whether they lose their leaves. Trees
   that keep their leaves year-round are called evergreens. Trees that lose
   their leaves during the autumn and winter are called deciduous trees.

    Physical Features
--
     * Read Aloud: Fast Forward (Subscriber Feature)

   Coast redwood trees are the tallest trees.Trees are usually more than 10
   feet (3 meters) tall. They have roots, a trunk, branches, and leaves. The
   trunk and branches are made of fibers called wood. These fibers are
   protected by an outer covering called bark. As the tree ages, the trunk
   and branches thicken. In some cases the number of rings in the trunk shows
   the age of the tree.

   The leaves make food for the tree through a process called photosynthesis.
   Veins run through the leaves. They carry water and food to and from the
   branches. Leaves are usually green. The leaves of deciduous trees often
   change colors in autumn before they fall off. New leaves then grow in
   spring.
--
   Trees are home to many animals, including koalas.Trees are very important
   to people and other animals. Many animals, including some birds, monkeys,
   apes, sloths, frogs, and squirrels live in trees. They also get their food
   from trees, including leaves, nuts, and fruits. For example, koalas spend
   most of their time in eucalyptus trees and eat only eucalyptus leaves.
   People use tree wood to build homes and furniture. Paper is made from wood
   fibers. Many people burn wood to cook and to heat their homes. Farmers
   plant orchards of trees that grow fruit for humans to eat.

   Many people enjoy hiking and playing in parks and forests.Many cities
   plant trees in parks and along streets to make those areas pleasant to
   look at and to spend time in. Forests and parks are places that protect
   trees and other plants for everyone to enjoy.

    Environmental Issues
--
   roots help to prevent soil erosion

   Because of the importance of trees, many governments around the world have
   tried to stop people from cutting down trees in the wilderness. But
   deforestation is still a problem in many parts of the world.

