     * Planet Possible

      What's the oldest tree on Earth—and will it survive climate change?

   Bristlecone pines in the western U.S. have been alive for nearly 5,000
--
   U.S. quarters. For decades, bristlecone pines, which can survive for up to
   5,000 years, were thought to be the planet’s oldest living things. Now a
   tree in Chile is posing a challenge. 
   ByCraig Welch
   Photographs ByKeith Ladzinski
--
   little else does. At altitudes near 11,000 feet along Nevada’s rocky Snake
    Range there are no grasses, no brush, few pests, no competition. No
   people to start wildfires. No nearby trees to spread pathogens.

   With nothing around to kill them, these ancient beasts are left alone year
--
   spread through their groves. But as fires grow bigger and more intense
   with climate change, the infernos pose a greater threat to these
   long-lived trees. 
   Right: Bristlecones grow slowly, which makes their sculpted wood difficult
   for pathogens and insects to penetrate, helping them live long lives.
--
   scientists. 
   Another strategy that keeps bristlecone pines going is “strip barking.”
   Even when sections of the tree die, the rest may live on as narrow bands
   of living tissue and bark connect roots to high branches. In some cases 95
   percent of the tree may be dead, while this small portion lives on. 
   Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

--
   pyramids were erected at Giza. That includes Methuselah, in California’s
   White Mountains, the oldest documented living bristlecone, which, based on
   tree-ring data, is 4,853 years old.

   Scientists have long believed that makes this tree the planet’s oldest
   single living thing. But that argument grew more complicated this month
   after a Chilean researcher used unusual techniques to date a tree of a
   different species, a Patagonian cypress. If correct, his work would make
   that South American conifer the newest oldest thing.

   The claim has tree researchers abuzz but skeptical, at least in part
   because the cypress, growing in a temperate rainforest, appears to live
   such a different life than a bristlecone. Despite their longevity both the
--
   Patagonian cypresses, also known as alerces, are native to Chile and
   Argentina and have long been recognized as the world’s second
   longest-lived tree species. The previous record-setting alerce was
   identified in the early 1990s by counting tree rings on a cut stump; it
   was more than 3,600 years old. (The oldest known giant sequoia, the third
   longest-lived species, was identified the same way and lived to 3,266.)
--
   But earlier this month, a story in Science by Gabriel Popkin revealed that
   environmental scientist Jonathan Barichivich and the researcher who first
   identified that old alerce had been studying another tree in a Chilean
   national park. The researchers used a T-shaped increment borer to drill in
   and remove a core sample from the moss-draped cypress. The boring device
   couldn’t reach the center of the tree, which is more than a dozen feet in
   diameter. But by combining their core sample with tree-ring information
   from other alerces, and using computer modeling, the pair estimated the
   tree was roughly 5,400 years old, with an 80 percent chance it was more
   than 5,000 years old.

   By combining a partial core sample with computer modeling, researchers in
   South America believe they can show that this Patagonian cypress tree,
   also called an alerce, towering out of a ravine in Chile, is at least
   5,000 years old, which would make it Earth’s oldest living tree. Some
   experts are skeptical. 
   Photograph by Jonathan Barichivich
--
   Others, though, are quite skeptical. Peter Brown, founder of Rocky
   Mountain Tree Ring Research, which gathers information on the world’s
   oldest trees, says Barichivich’s approach is too novel to make such a bold
   claim before publication. “There are many assumptions necessary for
   extrapolating total age from that,” Brown says.

   Brown doesn’t doubt the tree is significant. The partial core alone seems
   to show the tree was at least 2,400 years old, which would put it among
   the top 10 oldest trees on Brown’s list. But Brown has other reasons to be
   suspicious. For example, “this new estimated age is over 1,500 years older
   than the oldest known (alerce) tree to date,” Brown says.

   Brown also sees significant differences between the types of environments
   that tend to support the very oldest trees and the surroundings of the
   Patagonian cypress. In an isolated, austere landscape, like the snowy,
   rocky homes of slow-growing bristlecone, trees can just keep on going.
   Mossy rainforests, on the other hand, are full of life—and threats.

   Scientists still argue about why some trees are able to live so long. “My
   contention is that trees don’t necessarily die from old age like mammals,”
   Brown says. “Something has to come along and kill them.”

   Barichivich understands the skepticism. He says his colleague has found
   another alerce stump whose tree rings can all be counted and show it to be
   about 4,100 years old. (That data is also not yet published.) He also
   argues that tree-ring data suggests alerce actually grow more slowly than
   bristlecones, meaning their wood is also very dense.

   And as part of a recent research team that analyzed the relationship
   between the world’s longest-lived trees and climate, Barichivich believes
   the two species’ worlds are similar in the most important ways. The
   Chilean Coast Range is nothing like the American West, he says, “but there
--
   protected from fire and until recently from humans. Barichivich says his
   own Chilean grandfather, who worked as a ranger in the park, discovered
   the tree in the early 1970s and may well have been the first person to
   touch it.

--

   Regardless of which species turns out to be the longevity champ, those who
   study the world’s oldest trees are united by a common concern for how
   their favorite species will make it through rough times ahead.

--

   While the location of the very oldest bristlecones are kept secret,
   Barichivich’s Chilean tree now draws lots of tourists, who stomp around
   its base, potentially damaging roots. Climate change is also drying out
   the region, which could threaten the tree’s water uptake.

   Bristlecones, too, are seeing a changing world. On a cloudless day last
--
   One reason for that is the bristlecone’s capacity to handle stress. As
   soil erosion or root decay and age weaken a bristlecone’s trunk or
   branches, the entire tree does not die—only the portion under direct
   stress. Instead, these majestic beings practice “strip barking,” allowing
   thin bands of living tissue beneath the bark to curl up the tree
   delivering water from healthy roots. On some bristlecones, as little as 5
   percent of what you see may still, in fact, be alive.

   “You won’t usually see a super old tree that has bark all the way around
   it,” Baker says. “It’s just got this one little living part. Whole
   portions of the tree are now just really artistic-looking dead wood.”

   Bristlecones live across a broad altitude range, from about 6,500 feet up
   to more than 11,000 feet. They have survived all kinds of conditions. The
   trees are typically spaced far enough apart that even the occasional
   lightning-sparked fire rarely spreads beyond a few acres.

--

   Warming temperatures, drought, and more explosive fire pose new threats to
   these ancient trees, but mostly at the lower end of their range.
   Bristlecones are also susceptible to blister rust, an imported fungus that
   has killed millions of related trees, including whitebark pines in
   Yellowstone National Park. So far it has not appeared in the wild in Great
   Basin bristlecones.
--
Forests are reeling from climate change—but the future isn’t lost

   Heat, drought, and bug infestations are killing trees worldwide. If we
   change course now, we can limit the damage.
   Planting trees helps fight climate change—but we need billions more
   seedlings
     * Environment
     * Planet Possible

Planting trees helps fight climate change—but we need billions more seedlings

   The U.S. must more than double the production of seedlings to meet
   reforestation goals, researchers say.
   4 solutions for trees and forests threatened by a hotter world
     * Magazine
     * Planet Possible

4 solutions for trees and forests threatened by a hotter world

   Most important, of course, is to cut the emissions that are heating the
