   _____________________ [ Submit ] 

   Christmas tree burnings invoke symbol of Jesus as light to the world on   
   Epiphany                                                                  
                                                                             
--

   St. Mark’s Episcopal Church in Gulfport, Mississippi, hosts a Christmas
   tree bonfire for Epiphany each year on a beach near where the former
   church building stood until it was destroyed by Hurricane Katrina in 2005.
   Photo: St. Mark’s Episcopal Church
--
   [Episcopal News Service] The Christian holy day Epiphany, on Jan. 6, is
   also known as the “Feast of Lights,” and some Episcopal congregations
   celebrate this feast quite literally, by burning Christmas trees and
   greens in recognition of Jesus as a light to the world.

   “If you’ve ever seen Christmas trees burn … they go up in a tremendous
   blaze,” the Rev. Hillary Raining told Episcopal News Service in describing
   the annual Epiphany bonfire at St. Christopher’s Episcopal Church in
--

   A similar blaze is planned at All Saints’ Episcopal Church in
   Russellville, Arkansas. The fire, a mix of Christmas trees and ordinary
   firewood, will be followed by a short liturgy and blessing of kits of
   chalk that attendees can use to mark their front doors with the initials
--
   And at St. Mark’s Episcopal Church in Gulfport, Mississippi, the
   congregation will continue a local Epiphany tradition dating back more
   than 50 years when it hosts a Christmas tree bonfire on a nearby beach.
   The Epiphany bonfire has taken on greater meaning to the St. Mark’s
   congregation in the years since Hurricane Katrina destroyed the former
--
   on its website.

   The light from a Christmas tree fire invokes symbolism partly rooted in
   Epiphany’s origins as an alternative to pagan festivals that were held on
   the winter solstice – the darkest day of the year. Also known as Three
--
   At All Saints’, the church in Arkansas, the bonfire is scheduled for the
   evening Jan. 6. Clements will lead an adaptation of Evening Prayer as
   worshipers gather outdoors around the burning trees. The church is located
   on a wooded property, so the congregation will keep the blaze small for
   safety, Clements said, while still “bringing some light into the darkness,
--

   Raining, the rector at St. Christopher’s in suburban Philadelphia, noted
   that Christmas tree burns have ancient roots in Twelfth Night
   celebrations, which marked the end of the Christmas season. And though
   burning trees may not seem like the most environmentally friendly
   practice, Raining said it is preferable to leaving trees on the curb for
   disposal in a landfill. Also, the ashes from the fire will be used to
   fertilize the grounds of the church.

   St. Christopher’s will host its Christmas tree bonfire in the evening Jan.
   7, with the public invited to bring trees and greens from home. Past
   bonfires have been community events, attracting some residents who don’t
   normally attend the church. The church also invites the local fire
--
     * Trinity Leadership Fellows: A two-year journey of faith-inspired
       learning and mentorship | Apply by January 31
       Trinity Church Wall Street
     * Forward Movement releases new Lenten devotional and small group study
       Forward Movement
