   Link: canonical
   Link: alternate en-us
   National Geographic Logo - Home
   Skip to content
     * * * Newsletters
     * Subscribe
     * Menu
     * Environment
     * Planet Possible

      What's the oldest tree on Earth—and will it survive climate change?

   Bristlecone pines in the western U.S. have been alive for nearly 5,000
   years, but an upstart Patagonian cypress challenges that record.

   This 1,400-year-old bristlecone pine on Mount Washington in Nevada’s Great
   Basin National Park is so iconic its image is stamped on the back of some
   U.S. quarters. For decades, bristlecone pines, which can survive for up to
   5,000 years, were thought to be the planet’s oldest living things. Now a
   tree in Chile is posing a challenge. 
   ByCraig Welch
   Photographs ByKeith Ladzinski
   Published May 31, 2022
   • 11 min read
   ShareTweetEmail

   Great Basin National ParkThousands of feet above the Nevada desert, in a
   part of Great Basin National Park that tourists rarely see, park ecologist
   Gretchen Baker neared the top of Mount Washington and raised her
   binoculars. There just below, sprouting directly from the limestone, grew
   some of the oldest living things on Earth.

   Great Basin bristlecone pines, their dense pale trunks twisted like thick
   rope by centuries of gusting wind and rain, thrive here in part because so
   little else does. At altitudes near 11,000 feet along Nevada’s rocky Snake
    Range there are no grasses, no brush, few pests, no competition. No
   people to start wildfires. No nearby trees to spread pathogens.

   With nothing around to kill them, these ancient beasts are left alone year
   after year to simply do what they do: store water in needles that can live
   for decades and pack on the teensiest bit of heft at a time. The wood
   grows so slowly it gets too dense for beetles or disease to penetrate.

   Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.
   Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.
   Left: This young bristlecone pine was spared during the Phillips Ranch
   Fire in 2000, which killed thousands of others. One reason bristlecones
   live so long is that they grow in relative isolation, so fires rarely
   spread through their groves. But as fires grow bigger and more intense
   with climate change, the infernos pose a greater threat to these
   long-lived trees. 
   Right: Bristlecones grow slowly, which makes their sculpted wood difficult
   for pathogens and insects to penetrate, helping them live long lives.
   Their annual growth rings hold information about climate variability
   dating back thousands of years and are a valuable resource for
   scientists. 
   Another strategy that keeps bristlecone pines going is “strip barking.”
   Even when sections of the tree die, the rest may live on as narrow bands
   of living tissue and bark connect roots to high branches. In some cases 95
   percent of the tree may be dead, while this small portion lives on. 
   Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

   Some individual bristlecones have survived this way since before the
   pyramids were erected at Giza. That includes Methuselah, in California’s
   White Mountains, the oldest documented living bristlecone, which, based on
   tree-ring data, is 4,853 years old.

   Scientists have long believed that makes this tree the planet’s oldest
   single living thing. But that argument grew more complicated this month
   after a Chilean researcher used unusual techniques to date a tree of a
   different species, a Patagonian cypress. If correct, his work would make
   that South American conifer the newest oldest thing.

   The claim has tree researchers abuzz but skeptical, at least in part
   because the cypress, growing in a temperate rainforest, appears to live
   such a different life than a bristlecone. Despite their longevity both the
   bristlecones and the interloper are now facing questions about how well
   they’ll navigate the coming decades.

An old rival

   Patagonian cypresses, also known as alerces, are native to Chile and
   Argentina and have long been recognized as the world’s second
   longest-lived tree species. The previous record-setting alerce was
   identified in the early 1990s by counting tree rings on a cut stump; it
   was more than 3,600 years old. (The oldest known giant sequoia, the third
   longest-lived species, was identified the same way and lived to 3,266.)

   But earlier this month, a story in Science by Gabriel Popkin revealed that
   environmental scientist Jonathan Barichivich and the researcher who first
   identified that old alerce had been studying another tree in a Chilean
   national park. The researchers used a T-shaped increment borer to drill in
   and remove a core sample from the moss-draped cypress. The boring device
   couldn’t reach the center of the tree, which is more than a dozen feet in
   diameter. But by combining their core sample with tree-ring information
   from other alerces, and using computer modeling, the pair estimated the
   tree was roughly 5,400 years old, with an 80 percent chance it was more
   than 5,000 years old.

   By combining a partial core sample with computer modeling, researchers in
   South America believe they can show that this Patagonian cypress tree,
   also called an alerce, towering out of a ravine in Chile, is at least
   5,000 years old, which would make it Earth’s oldest living tree. Some
   experts are skeptical. 
   Photograph by Jonathan Barichivich
   Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

   The research has not been peer-reviewed yet, but Barichivich has shared
   his findings at conferences. Nate Stephenson, an emeritus scientist with
   the U.S. Geological Survey, who has studied giant sequoias for four
   decades, finds the results interesting, but is withholding judgment until
   Barichivich publishes a paper detailing his methods. Still, “the prospect
   is certainly exciting,” Stephenson tells Popkin.

   Others, though, are quite skeptical. Peter Brown, founder of Rocky
   Mountain Tree Ring Research, which gathers information on the world’s
   oldest trees, says Barichivich’s approach is too novel to make such a bold
   claim before publication. “There are many assumptions necessary for
   extrapolating total age from that,” Brown says.

   Brown doesn’t doubt the tree is significant. The partial core alone seems
   to show the tree was at least 2,400 years old, which would put it among
   the top 10 oldest trees on Brown’s list. But Brown has other reasons to be
   suspicious. For example, “this new estimated age is over 1,500 years older
   than the oldest known (alerce) tree to date,” Brown says.

   Brown also sees significant differences between the types of environments
   that tend to support the very oldest trees and the surroundings of the
   Patagonian cypress. In an isolated, austere landscape, like the snowy,
   rocky homes of slow-growing bristlecone, trees can just keep on going.
   Mossy rainforests, on the other hand, are full of life—and threats.

   Scientists still argue about why some trees are able to live so long. “My
   contention is that trees don’t necessarily die from old age like mammals,”
   Brown says. “Something has to come along and kill them.”

   Barichivich understands the skepticism. He says his colleague has found
   another alerce stump whose tree rings can all be counted and show it to be
   about 4,100 years old. (That data is also not yet published.) He also
   argues that tree-ring data suggests alerce actually grow more slowly than
   bristlecones, meaning their wood is also very dense.

   And as part of a recent research team that analyzed the relationship
   between the world’s longest-lived trees and climate, Barichivich believes
   the two species’ worlds are similar in the most important ways. The
   Chilean Coast Range is nothing like the American West, he says, “but there
   are special conditions here, too.”

   His ancient alerce grows on a cloudy south-facing slope, where the annual
   mean temperature is roughly 45 degrees Fahrenheit. It’s found in a ravine,
   protected from fire and until recently from humans. Barichivich says his
   own Chilean grandfather, who worked as a ranger in the park, discovered
   the tree in the early 1970s and may well have been the first person to
   touch it.

   Bristlecones live in harsh environments, often sprouting out of dry, rocky
   soils above 11,000 feet where little else can survive. Pummeled by
   relentless winds, they curl and bend and don’t reach great heights, but
   their diameter may continue to expand for centuries.
   Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

A common threat

   Regardless of which species turns out to be the longevity champ, those who
   study the world’s oldest trees are united by a common concern for how
   their favorite species will make it through rough times ahead.

   Wildfires worsened by our fossil fuel emissions have wiped out up to 19
   percent of California’s giant sequoias in just the last two years.

   (Read about how forests are reeling from climate change—but the future
   isn’t lost.)

   While the location of the very oldest bristlecones are kept secret,
   Barichivich’s Chilean tree now draws lots of tourists, who stomp around
   its base, potentially damaging roots. Climate change is also drying out
   the region, which could threaten the tree’s water uptake.

   Bristlecones, too, are seeing a changing world. On a cloudless day last
   July, Gretchen Baker’s pickup lurched up a gravel road so steep it felt at
   times like it might tumble off the mountain. Anna Schoettle, a plant
   ecophysiologist with the U.S. Forest Service, bounced around in the back
   seat. They were here to explain how the ancient pines might weather rising
   temperatures.

   The oldest living sequoias were seedlings more than 3,200 years ago,
   around the time of the Trojan War. Back then, the oldest bristlecones
   living today would already have been around for 1,600 years.

   One reason for that is the bristlecone’s capacity to handle stress. As
   soil erosion or root decay and age weaken a bristlecone’s trunk or
   branches, the entire tree does not die—only the portion under direct
   stress. Instead, these majestic beings practice “strip barking,” allowing
   thin bands of living tissue beneath the bark to curl up the tree
   delivering water from healthy roots. On some bristlecones, as little as 5
   percent of what you see may still, in fact, be alive.

   “You won’t usually see a super old tree that has bark all the way around
   it,” Baker says. “It’s just got this one little living part. Whole
   portions of the tree are now just really artistic-looking dead wood.”

   Bristlecones live across a broad altitude range, from about 6,500 feet up
   to more than 11,000 feet. They have survived all kinds of conditions. The
   trees are typically spaced far enough apart that even the occasional
   lightning-sparked fire rarely spreads beyond a few acres.

   But as we rounded a corner in Baker’s truck, an image of the planet’s new
   reality came into focus. We rolled by acre upon acre of burned husks. A
   hotter, bigger, more powerful fire, fueled in part by a changing climate,
   had blown through in the last few decades, wiping out many bristlecones.

   Warming temperatures, drought, and more explosive fire pose new threats to
   these ancient trees, but mostly at the lower end of their range.
   Bristlecones are also susceptible to blister rust, an imported fungus that
   has killed millions of related trees, including whitebark pines in
   Yellowstone National Park. So far it has not appeared in the wild in Great
   Basin bristlecones.

   “Blister rust is a threat, absolutely,” says Stanley Kitchen, an emeritus
   research scientist with the Forest Service. “How big of a threat is
   something I don’t know. That’s a big question mark for me.”

   Baker, Schoettle, and Kitchen worry that bristlecones at that lower edge
   of their elevation range are likely to have a rough time in coming years.

   But “I don’t worry about the direct effects of climate change on the upper
   half, where it’s most at home,” Kitchen says. “It would take, I think,
   even more climate change than is projected to make them disappear.”

   ShareTweetEmail

     ----------------------------------------------------------------------

     ----------------------------------------------------------------------

Read This Next

   Forests are reeling from climate change—but the future isn’t lost
     * Magazine

Forests are reeling from climate change—but the future isn’t lost

   Heat, drought, and bug infestations are killing trees worldwide. If we
   change course now, we can limit the damage.
   Planting trees helps fight climate change—but we need billions more
   seedlings
     * Environment
     * Planet Possible

Planting trees helps fight climate change—but we need billions more seedlings

   The U.S. must more than double the production of seedlings to meet
   reforestation goals, researchers say.
   How a warming climate threatens forest elephants
     * Magazine

How a warming climate threatens forest elephants

   In remote Gabon, warmer nights and less rainfall may be preventing trees
   from growing the nutritious fruit the animals depend on.
   Why forests are our best chance for survival in a warming world
     * Magazine
     * From the Editor

Why forests are our best chance for survival in a warming world

   Trees provide habitats, resources, and refuge, and they help absorb fossil
   fuels’ carbon emissions. They are also at profound risk, but there's still
   time to act.

Go Further

  Animals

     * Africa's vultures are disappearing. Disaster could follow.
          * Animals
       Africa's vultures are disappearing. Disaster could follow.
     * Here’s how your cat experiences the world
          * Animals
       Here’s how your cat experiences the world
     * Why we cheered for nature to 'fight back' in 2023
          * Animals
       Why we cheered for nature to 'fight back' in 2023
     * On Monkey Mountain, this rare species has an oasis from the city
          * Animals
       On Monkey Mountain, this rare species has an oasis from the city
     * Even if you think raccoons are cute, feeding them is not
          * Animals
       Even if you think raccoons are cute, feeding them is not
     * Meet Wicked—just named America's best working dog
          * Animals
       Meet Wicked—just named America's best working dog

  Environment

     * Japan spent decades making itself earthquake resilient. Here's how.
          * Environment
       Japan spent decades making itself earthquake resilient. Here's how.
     * The fungus in 'The Last of Us' is real—and it's expensive
          * Environment
       The fungus in 'The Last of Us' is real—and it's expensive
     * 10 simple ways to change your life in 2024
          * Environment
       10 simple ways to change your life in 2024
     * What does Santa have to do with … psychedelic mushrooms?
          * Environment
       What does Santa have to do with … psychedelic mushrooms?
     * Cobalt powers our lives. What is it—and why is it so controversial?
          * Environment
       Cobalt powers our lives. What is it—and why is it so controversial?
     * Keeping a finger on the Okavango’s pulse, Video Story
          * Paid Content
       Keeping a finger on the Okavango’s pulse

  History & Culture

     * Is this the world's oldest saddle?
          * History Magazine
       Is this the world's oldest saddle?
     * These Japanese mythical creatures were born from disaster
          * History & Culture
       These Japanese mythical creatures were born from disaster
     * What inspired this 16th-century map of sea monsters?
          * History & Culture
       What inspired this 16th-century map of sea monsters?
     * Why the 'Gate of Grief' is making headlines
          * History & Culture
       Why the 'Gate of Grief' is making headlines
     * Why we sing ‘Auld Lang Syne’ on New Year’s Eve
          * History & Culture
       Why we sing ‘Auld Lang Syne’ on New Year’s Eve
     * Do you wash raw meat before cooking?
          * History & Culture
       Do you wash raw meat before cooking?

  Science

     * Why are so many adults just now being diagnosed with ADHD?
          * Science
          * Mind, Body, Wonder
       Why are so many adults just now being diagnosed with ADHD?
     * There’s a better way to wake up. Here’s what experts advise.
          * Science
       There’s a better way to wake up. Here’s what experts advise.
     * Is sleeping through the night the ‘right’ way to sleep?
          * Science
       Is sleeping through the night the ‘right’ way to sleep?
     * 8 strategies to make your New Year’s resolutions stick
          * Science
          * Mind, Body, Wonder
       8 strategies to make your New Year’s resolutions stick
     * COVID-19 has tested us. Will we be ready for the next pandemic?
          * Science
          * Coronavirus Coverage
       COVID-19 has tested us. Will we be ready for the next pandemic?
     * Scientists explain the real science behind their favorite sci-fi
       movies
          * Science
       Scientists explain the real science behind their favorite sci-fi
       movies

  Travel

     * Rapper and chef Big Zuu on okra stew and the best roti in London
          * Travel
       Rapper and chef Big Zuu on okra stew and the best roti in London
     * 5 experts share their favourite destinations in the Americas
          * Paid Content
       5 experts share their favourite destinations in the Americas
     * Visiting Alaska? Here’s what the locals love.
          * Travel
       Visiting Alaska? Here’s what the locals love.
     * 10 best things to do in Alaska
          * Travel
       10 best things to do in Alaska
     * These destination dupes help you avoid the crowds
          * Travel
       These destination dupes help you avoid the crowds
     * The essential guide to visiting Alaska
          * Travel
       The essential guide to visiting Alaska

    Legal

     * Terms of Use
     * Privacy Policy
     * Your US State Privacy Rights
     * Children's Online Privacy Policy
     * Interest-Based Ads
     * About Nielsen Measurement
     * Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information

    Our Sites

     * Nat Geo Home
     * Attend a Live Event
     * Book a Trip
     * Buy Maps
     * Inspire Your Kids
     * Shop Nat Geo
     * Visit the D.C. Museum
     * Watch TV
     * Learn About Our Impact
     * Support Our Mission
     * Masthead
     * Press Room
     * Advertise With Us

    Join Us

     * Subscribe
     * Customer Service
     * Renew Subscription
     * Manage Your Subscription
     * Work at Nat Geo
     * Sign Up for Our Newsletters
     * Contribute to Protect the Planet

    Follow us

   National Geographic InstagramNational Geographic FacebookNational
   Geographic TwitterNational Geographic YoutubeNational Geographic
   LinkedinNational Geographic TiktokNational Geographic Reddit
   United States (Change)

     ----------------------------------------------------------------------

   National Geographic Logo - Home

   Copyright © 1996-2015 National Geographic SocietyCopyright © 2015-2024
   National Geographic Partners, LLC. All rights reserved
