   Link: canonical
   Link: amphtml
   Oregon Public Broadcasting
   Jan. 6, 2024
   contribute now
   Menu
   In The News
   Alaska Airlines
   Oregon librarians
   Harney Co. cell service
   OK Theatre
   amputee soccer
   Portland’s toppled monuments
   Eugene Weekly
   Klamath dams
   Medford hospital deaths
   Invasive green crabs

 As tree species face decline, ‘assisted migration’ gains popularity in Pacific
                                   Northwest

   By NATHAN GILLES, Columbia Insight
   PORTLAND, Oregon Jan. 2, 2024 2 p.m.

‘Assisted migration’ means humans can help trees keep up with climate change by
moving them to more favorable ecosystems faster than the trees could migrate on
their own

   Douglas fir trees that died as a result of insect damage following heat
   stress are visible in the Willamette National Forest, Ore., Friday, Oct.
   27, 2023. As native trees in the Pacific Northwest die off due to climate
   change, the U.S. Forest Service and others are turning to a strategy
   called "assisted migration."

   Douglas fir trees that died as a result of insect damage following heat
   stress are visible in the Willamette National Forest, Ore., Friday, Oct.
   27, 2023. As native trees in the Pacific Northwest die off due to climate
   change, the U.S. Forest Service and others are turning to a strategy
   called "assisted migration."

   Amanda Loman / AP

   As native trees in the Pacific Northwest die off due to climate changes,
   the U.S. Forest Service in Portland, Oregon, and citizen groups around
   Puget Sound, Washington, are turning to a deceptively simple climate
   adaptation strategy called “assisted migration.”

   THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR:
   Become a Sponsor

   As the world’s climate warms, tree-growing ranges in the Northern
   Hemisphere are predicted to move farther north and higher in elevation.

   Trees, of course, can’t get up and walk to their new climatic homes. This
   is where assisted migration is supposed to lend a hand.

   The idea is that humans can help trees keep up with climate change by
   moving them to more favorable ecosystems faster than the trees could
   migrate on their own.

   Yet not everyone agrees on what type of assisted migration the region
   needs — or that it’s always a good thing.

   In the Pacific Northwest, a divide has emerged between groups advocating
   for assisted migration that would help struggling native trees, and one
   that could instead see native species replaced on the landscape by trees
   from the south, including coast redwoods and giant sequoias.

   “There is a huge difference between assisted population migration and
   assisted species migration,” said Michael Case, forest ecologist at the
   Virginia-based Nature Conservancy.

   Related: Extreme heat represents a new threat to trees and plants in the
   Pacific Northwest

   Case currently runs an assisted population migration experiment at the
   Conservancy’s Ellsworth Creek Preserve in western Washington.

   Assisted population migration involves moving a native species' seeds, and
   by extension its genes, within its current growing range.

   By contrast, assisted species migration involves moving a species well
   outside its existing range, such as introducing redwoods and sequoias to
   Washington.

   A third form of assisted migration, called “range expansion,” amounts to
   moving a species just beyond its current growing range.

   Case’s project involves testing whether breeds of native Douglas fir and
   western hemlock from drier parts of the Pacific Northwest can be used to
   help western Washington forests adapt to climate change. He says the
   Nature Conservancy is focusing on population migration because it has
   fewer ecological risks.

   “Whenever you plant something in an area where it is not locally found you
   increase the risk of failure,” Case said. “You increase the risk of
   disturbing potential ecosystem functions and processes.”

   A section of a Douglas fir tree with the bark removed by scientists to
   examine insect damage that led to the tree's death following heat stress
   in the Willamette National Forest, Ore., Friday, Oct. 27, 2023.

   A section of a Douglas fir tree with the bark removed by scientists to
   examine insect damage that led to the tree's death following heat stress
   in the Willamette National Forest, Ore., Friday, Oct. 27, 2023.

   Amanda Loman / AP

   ——

   EDITOR’S NOTE: This story is part of a collaboration between The
   Associated Press and Columbia Insight, exploring the impact of climate on
   trees in the Pacific Northwest.

   ——

   Population migration is the only form of assisted migration currently
   practiced nationwide by the Forest Service, according to David Lytle, the
   agency’s deputy chief for research and development.

   “We are very, very cautious and do not engage in the long-distance
   movement and establishment of plant material outside and disjunct from the
   historic range of a species,” said Lytle.

   The Forest Service is pursing assisted population migration because it’s
   likely to have few if any “negative consequences” to ecosystems, he said.

   Douglas Tallamy, professor of entomology and wildlife ecology at the
   University of Delaware, said one potential negative consequence of species
   migration is the possibility that native caterpillars might not eat the
   leaves of migrated nonnative tree species. Because caterpillars feed birds
   and other animals, this could lead to disruptions to the food web.

   This could happen if the city of Portland migrates oak species from places
   to the south, Tallamy noted. “Oaks are the most important plant for
   supporting wildlife that we have in North America,” he said, “but when you
   move them out of range, the things that are adapted to eating them no
   longer have access to them.”

   THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR:
   Become a Sponsor

Portland’s experimentation with assisted migration of trees

   The city of Portland’s Urban Forestry program is currently experimenting
   with the assisted migration of 11 tree species, including three oak
   species to the south: California black oak, canyon live oak and interior
   live oak.

   Asked via email about potential ecological disruptions Portland’s City
   Forester & Urban Forestry Manager Jenn Cairo responded: “We use research
   from universities, state and federal sources, and local and regional field
   practitioner experience.”

   Another advocate for species migration is the Puget Sound-based,
   citizen-led PropagationNation. The organization has planted trees in
   several parks in the Seattle area and has the ambitious goal of “bringing
   a million coast redwoods and giant sequoias to the Northwest,” according
   to its website.

   The PropagationNation website also recommends planting redwoods in areas
   where native western red cedar, western hemlock, Sitka spruce and big leaf
   maple already grow.

   Western red cedar, western hemlock and big leaf maple have all seen
   die-offs and growth declines in recent years tied to climate.

   A dead branch is visible on a Western Red Cedar tree in the Willamette
   National Forest, Ore., Oct. 27, 2023.

   A dead branch is visible on a Western Red Cedar tree in the Willamette
   National Forest, Ore., Oct. 27, 2023.

   Amanda Loman / AP

   Philip Stielstra, PropagationNation’s founder and president, and a retired
   Boeing employee, declined to comment for this story.

   David Milarch, founder of the Michigan-based Archangel Ancient Tree
   Archive, which has supplied PropagationNation with redwoods and sequoias,
   says his trees aren’t intended to replace Pacific Northwest native
   species.

   “All we are doing is extending the range (of redwoods and sequoias) north
   in the hopes that they will still be here in 100 to 200 years and not join
   the list of trees that are going extinct,” said Milarch.

Widespread assisted migration may be risky, Forest Service says

   Robert Slesak, research forester at the Pacific Northwest Research
   Station, runs the Forest Service’s Experimental Network for Assisted
   Migration and Establishment Silviculture, or ENAMES project, which
   oversees population migration sites in Washington, Oregon and California.

   Slesak called moving redwoods north a “risky proposition.” He said he has
   serious concerns about both assisted species migration and assisted
   migration efforts that lack experimental rigor.

   “Widespread assisted species migration without a lot of experimental
   results to guide it is risky,” said Slesak. “Everyone knows we need to do
   some kind of action related to climate, but there’s a real risk of making
   it worse.”

   Nevertheless, with the effects of climate change increasing, it’s a risk
   increasingly being assumed by public and private groups around the Pacific
   Northwest.

   ___

   Nathan Gilles is a science writer and journalist based in Vancouver,
   Washington.

   ___

   Columbia Insight is an Oregon-based nonprofit news website covering
   environmental issues affecting the Pacific Northwest.

   ___

   Associated Press climate and environmental coverage receives support from
   several private foundations. See more about AP’s climate initiative here.
   The AP is solely responsible for all content.

   THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR:
   Become a Sponsor
   THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR:
   Become a Sponsor

  OPB’s First Look newsletter

   Sign up to get important news and culture from around the Northwest,
   delivered to your inbox six days a week.
   Email
   _____________________
   Please leave this field blank [ ] Sign Up

Related Stories

Extreme heat represents a new threat to trees and plants in the Pacific
Northwest

   In summer of 2021, the Pacific Northwest experienced a record-breaking
   heat wave that sent the normally temperate region into Death Valley-like
   extremes that took a heavy toll on trees as well as people.

   Dec. 31, 2023

   Tags: Forestry, Climate Change, Trees, Oregon, Washington

   OPB’s critical reporting and inspiring programs are made possible by the
   power of member support. Be a part of it!
   Become a Sustainer now
   TV & Radio Schedules
   Sponsorship
   Help
   Manage My Membership
   Contact Us
   Notifications
   Privacy Policy
   FCC Public Files
   FCC Applications
   Terms of Use
   Editorial Policy
   SMS T&C
   Contest Rules
   Accessibility
   Listen to the OPB News live stream (opens new window)

   Streaming Now

   Snap Judgment

   Show switch stream buttons
   Switch Stream:OPB NewsListen to the OPB News live stream (opens new
   window)KMHDListen to the KMHD live stream (opens new window)
