   Link: canonical
   History Logo
   ShowsThis Day In HistoryScheduleTopicsStories
     * History Classics
     * Live TV
     * Your Profile
   _____________________ [ Submit ]
   Your Profile
   [IMG]History
     * Find History on Facebook (Opens in a new window)
     * Find History on Twitter (Opens in a new window)
     * Find History on YouTube (Opens in a new window)
     * Find History on Instagram (Opens in a new window)
     * Find History on TikTok (Opens in a new window)
   Email Updates
     * Live TV
     * History Classics
     * Shows
     * This Day In History
     * Schedule
     * Topics
     * Stories
     * Videos
     * History Podcasts
     * History Vault
     * Shop
    1. Home
    2. Topics
    3. Christmas
    4. History of Christmas Trees

                           History of Christmas Trees

   By: History.com Editors

   Published: November 28, 2023

   copy page linkPrint Page
   HISTORY: Christmas TreesRicardo Reitmeyer/Getty Images

Table of Contents

    1. How Did Christmas Trees Start?
    2. Christmas Trees From Germany
    3. Who Brought Christmas Trees to America?
    4. Rockefeller Center Christmas Tree
    5. Christmas Trees Around the World
    6. Christmas Tree Trivia and Facts

   The history of Christmas trees has many roots, ranging from the use of
   evergreens in ancient Egypt and Rome to the German traditions of candlelit
   trees that made its way to America in the 1800s. Discover the history of
   the Christmas tree, from the earliest winter solstice celebrations to
   Queen Victoria’s decorating habits and the annual lighting of the
   Rockefeller Center tree in New York City.

How Did Christmas Trees Start?

   Long before the advent of Christianity, plants and trees that remained
   green all year had a special meaning for people in the winter. Just as
   people today decorate their homes during the festive season with pine,
   spruce, and fir trees, many ancient peoples hung evergreen boughs over
   their doors and windows. In many countries it was believed that evergreens
   would keep away witches, ghosts, evil spirits, and illness.

   History of Christmas Trees

   In the Northern hemisphere, the shortest day and longest night of the year
   falls on December 21 or December 22 and is called the winter solstice.
   Many ancient people believed that the sun was a god and that winter came
   every year because the sun god had become sick and weak. They celebrated
   the solstice because it meant that at last the sun god would begin to get
   well. Evergreen boughs reminded them of all the green plants that would
   grow again when the sun god was strong and summer would return.

   The ancient Egyptians worshipped a god called Ra, who had the head of a
   hawk and wore the sun as a blazing disk in his crown. At the solstice,
   when Ra began to recover from his illness, the Egyptians filled their
   homes with green palms and papyrus reeds, which symbolized for them the
   triumph of life over death.

     Did you know? Christmas trees are grown in all 50 states including
     Hawaii and Alaska.

   Early Romans marked the solstice with a feast called Saturnalia in honor
   of Saturn, the god of agriculture. The Romans knew that the solstice meant
   that soon, farms and orchards would be green and fruitful. To mark the
   occasion, they decorated their homes and temples with evergreen boughs.

   In Northern Europe the Druids, the priests of the ancient Celts, also
   decorated their temples with evergreen boughs as a symbol of everlasting
   life. The Vikings in Scandinavia honored the evergreen mistletoe for its
   role in the death of the Balder, a god of light.

Christmas Trees From Germany

   Germany is credited with starting the Christmas tree tradition—as we now
   know it—by the 16th century  when sources record devout Christians
   bringing decorated trees into their homes. Some built Christmas pyramids
   of wood and decorated them with evergreens and candles if wood was scarce.

   It is a widely held belief that Martin Luther, the 16th-century Protestant
   reformer, first added lighted candles to a tree. According to a common
   version of the story, walking home one winter evening, Luther was awed by
   the stars twinkling amidst evergreens. To recapture the scene for his
   family, he erected a tree in the main room and wired its branches with
   lighted candles.

Who Brought Christmas Trees to America?

   Most 19th-century Americans found Christmas trees an oddity. The first
   records of Christmas trees being cut for display comes from the 1820s in
   Pennsylvania’s German community, although trees may have been a tradition
   there even earlier. As early as 1747, Moravian Germans in Pennsylvania had
   a community tree in the form of a wooden pyramid decorated with candles.
   But, as late as the 1840s, Christmas trees were seen as pagan symbols and
   not accepted by most Americans.

   It is not surprising that, like many other festive Christmas customs, the
   tree was adopted so late in America. New England’s first Puritan leaders
   viewed Christmas celebrations as unholy. The pilgrims’s second governor,
   William Bradford, wrote that he tried hard to stamp out “pagan mockery” of
   the observance, penalizing any frivolity.

   In 1659, the General Court of Massachusetts enacted a law making any
   observance of December 25 a penal offense; people were fined for hanging
   decorations. That stern solemnity continued until the influx of German and
   Irish immigrants in the 19th century undermined the Puritan legacy.

   Queen Victoria's Christmas TreeQueen Victoria's Christmas TreeBettmann
   Archive/Getty Images
   An illustration from a December 1848 edition of the Illustrated London
   News shows Queen Victoria and her family surrounding a Christmas tree.

   In 1846, the popular royals, Queen Victoria and her German Prince, Albert,
   were sketched in the Illustrated London News standing with their children
   around a Christmas tree. Unlike the previous royal family, Victoria was
   very popular with her subjects, and what was done at court immediately
   became fashionable—not only in Britain, but with fashion-conscious East
   Coast American Society. The Christmas tree had arrived.

   By the 1890s Christmas ornaments were arriving from Germany and Christmas
   tree popularity was on the rise around the U.S. It was noted that
   Europeans used small trees about four feet in height, while Americans
   liked their Christmas trees to extend from floor to ceiling.

   The early 20th century saw Americans decorating their trees mainly with
   homemade ornaments, while many German Americans continued to use apples,
   nuts and marzipan cookies. Stringed popcorn was added to trees' decoration
   after being dyed bright colors and interlaced with berries and nuts.
   Electricity brought about Christmas lights, making it possible for
   Christmas trees to glow for days on end. With this, Christmas trees began
   to appear in town squares across the country and having a Christmas tree
   in the home became an American tradition.

   The Invention of Christmas Lights

Rockefeller Center Christmas Tree

   The Rockefeller Center tree is located at Rockefeller Center, west of
   Fifth Avenue from 47th through 51st Streets in New York City.

   The Rockefeller Center Christmas Tree dates back to the Depression era,
   with the first tree placed in 1931. It was a small unadorned tree set up
   by construction workers at the center of the construction site. Two years
   later, another tree was placed there, this time with lights.

   These days, the giant Rockefeller Center tree is laden with over 50,000
   Christmas lights. The tallest tree displayed at Rockefeller Center arrived
   in 1999. It was a Norway Spruce that measured 100 feet tall and hailed
   from Killingworth, Connecticut.

Christmas Trees Around the World

   Christmas Trees in Canada
   German settlers began migrating to Canada from the United States in the
   1700s. They brought Canada’s first Christmas trees and, in later
   generations, gingerbread houses and Advent calendars. When Queen
   Victoria’s German husband, Prince Albert, put up a Christmas tree at
   Windsor Castle in 1848, Christmas trees became a widely popular tradition
   throughout England, the United States and Canada.

   Christmas Trees in Mexico
   In most Mexican homes the principal holiday adornment is el Nacimiento
   (Nativity scene). However, a decorated Christmas tree may be incorporated
   in the Nacimiento or set up elsewhere in the home. As purchase of a
   natural pine represents a luxury commodity to most Mexican families, the
   typical arbolito (little tree) is often an artificial one, a bare branch
   cut from a copal tree (Bursera microphylla) or some type of shrub
   collected from the countryside.

   Christmas Trees in Great Britain
   The Norway spruce is the traditional species used to decorate homes in
   Britain. The Norway spruce was a native species in the British Isles
   before the last Ice Age, and was reintroduced here before the 1500s.

   Christmas Trees in Greenland
   Since icy Greenland lacks large native forests, most Christmas trees are
   imported. They are decorated with candles and bright ornaments.

   Christmas Trees in Guatemala
   The Christmas tree has joined the Nacimiento as a popular ornament because
   of the large German population in Guatemala.

   Christmas Trees in Brazil
   Although Christmas falls during the summer in most of Brazil, sometimes
   pine trees are decorated with little pieces of cotton that represent
   falling snow.

   Christmas Trees in Ireland
   Christmas trees are bought anytime in December and decorated with colored
   lights, tinsel, and baubles. Some people favor the angel on top of the
   tree, others the star. The house is decorated with garlands, candles,
   holly, and ivy. Wreaths and mistletoe are hung on the door.

   Christmas Trees in Sweden
   Most people buy Christmas trees well before Christmas Eve, but it’s not
   common to take the tree inside and decorate it until just a few days
   before. Evergreen trees are decorated with stars, sunbursts and snowflakes
   made from straw. Other decorations include colorful wooden animals and
   straw centerpieces.

   Christmas Trees in Norway
   Norwegians often take a trip to the woods to select a Christmas tree, a
   trip that their grandfathers probably did not make. The Christmas tree was
   not introduced into Norway from Germany until the latter half of the 19th
   century; to the country districts it came even later. Many families
   decorate their trees on ‘Little Christmas Eve’—December 23. A Norwegian
   ritual known as “circling the Christmas tree” follows, where everyone
   joins hands to form a ring around the tree and then walks around it
   singing carols.

   Christmas Trees in Ukraine
   Celebrated on December 25th by Catholics and on January 7th by Orthodox
   Christians, Christmas is the most popular holiday in the Ukraine. During
   the Christmas season, which also includes New Year’s Day, people decorate
   fir trees and have parties.

   Christmas Trees in Spain
   A popular Christmas custom in Catalonia is the Caga Tió, a decorated log
   that children “feed” scraps of food during the days before Christmas. On
   Christmas, the log is covered with a blanket and the children hit it with
   a stick. Then the blanket is removed to reveal the treats like toffee and
   hazelnuts that Caga Tió has “defecated.

   Christmas Trees in Italy
   In one Italian tradition, the presepio (manger or crib) represents in
   miniature the Holy Family in the stable and is the center of Christmas for
   families. Guests kneel before it and musicians sing before it. The
   presepio figures are usually hand-carved and very detailed in features and
   dress. The scene is often set out in the shape of a triangle. It provides
   the base of a pyramid-like structure called the ceppo. This is a wooden
   frame arranged to make a pyramid several feet high. Several tiers of thin
   shelves are supported by this frame. It is entirely decorated with colored
   paper, gilt pine cones, and miniature colored pennants. Small candles are
   fastened to the tapering sides. A star or small doll is hung at the apex
   of the triangular sides. The shelves above the manger scene have small
   gifts of fruit, candy, and presents. The ceppo is likely related to older
   ‘tree of light’ traditions linked to Christmas trees in other countries.
   Some houses even have a ceppo for each child in the family.

   Christmas Trees in Germany
   Many Christmas traditions practiced around the world today started in
   Germany.

   As mentioned above, some Lutheran traditions credit Martin Luther with
   placing the first lighted candles on a Christmas tree.

   Another legend says that in the early 16th century, people in Germany
   combined two customs that had been practiced in different countries around
   the globe. The Paradise tree (a fir tree decorated with apples)
   represented the Tree of Knowledge in the Garden of Eden. The Christmas
   Light, a small, pyramid-like frame, usually decorated with glass balls,
   tinsel and a candle on top, was a symbol of the birth of Christ as the
   Light of the World. Changing the tree’s apples to tinsel balls and cookies
   and combining this new tree with the light placed on top, the Germans
   created the tree that many of us know today.

   The modern Tannenbaum (Christmas trees) is traditionally decorated in
   secret with lights, tinsel and ornaments by parents and then lit and
   revealed on Christmas Eve with cookies, nuts and gifts under its branches.

   Christmas Trees in South Africa
   Christmas is a summer holiday in South Africa. Although Christmas trees
   are not common, windows are often draped with sparkling cotton wool and
   tinsel.

   Christmas Trees in Saudi Arabia
   Christian Americans, Europeans, Indians, Filipinos, and others living in
   Saudia Arabia have to celebrate Christmas privately in their homes.
   Christmas lights are generally not tolerated. Most families place their
   Christmas trees somewhere inconspicuous.

   Christmas Trees in Philippines
   Fresh pine trees are too expensive for many Filipinos, so handmade trees
   in an array of colors and sizes are often used. Star lanterns, or parol,
   appear everywhere in December. They are made from bamboo sticks, covered
   with brightly colored rice paper or cellophane, and usually feature a
   tassel on each point. There is usually one in every window, each
   representing the Star of Bethlehem.

   Christmas Trees in China
   More than 80 percent of the world’s artificial Christmas trees are made in
   China, but a much smaller portion of Chinese people celebrate Christmas as
   a religious holiday. Those who do often put up artificial trees—“trees of
   light” decorated with paper chains and lanterns.

   Christmas Trees in Japan
   For most of the Japanese who celebrate Christmas, it’s purely a secular
   holiday devoted to the love of their children. Christmas trees are
   decorated with small toys, dolls, paper ornaments, gold paper fans and
   lanterns, and wind chimes. Miniature candles are also put among the tree
   branches. One of the most popular ornaments is the origami crane. Japanese
   children have exchanged thousands of folded paper “birds of peace” with
   young people all over the world as a pledge that war must not happen
   again.

Christmas Tree Trivia and Facts

   Christmas trees have been sold commercially in the United States since
   about 1850.

   In 1979, the National Christmas Tree was not lighted except for the top
   ornament. This was done in honor of the American hostages in Iran.

   Between 1887-1933 a fishing schooner called the Christmas Ship would tie
   up at the Clark Street bridge and sell spruce and pine trees from Michigan
   to Chicagoans.

   The much-disputed title for the tallest living Christmas tree likely goes
   to an allegedly 160-foot Sitka Spruce in Ferndale, California.

   Franklin Pierce, the 14th president, is often credited with bringing the
   Christmas tree tradition to the White House in the early 1850s.

   In 1923, President Calvin Coolidge started the National Christmas Tree
   Lighting Ceremony now held every year on the White House lawn.

   Since 1966, the National Christmas Tree Association has given a Christmas
   tree to the President and first family.

   Most Christmas trees are cut weeks before they get to a retail outlet.

   In 1912, what were likely the first major community Christmas trees in the
   United States were erected in Boston, New York City and Hartford, Conn.

   Christmas trees generally take six to eight years to mature.

   Christmas trees are grown in all 50 states including Hawaii and Alaska.

   Ninety-eight percent of all natural Christmas trees are grown on farms.

   More than 1,000,000 acres of land have been planted with Christmas trees.

   On average, as many as 1,500 Christmas trees are planted per acre.

   You should never burn your Christmas tree in the fireplace. It can
   contribute to creosote buildup.

   Other types of trees such as cherry and hawthorns were used as Christmas
   trees in the past.

   Thomas Edison’s assistants came up with the idea of electric lights for
   Christmas trees.

   In 1963, the National Christmas Tree was not lit until December 22nd
   because of a national 30-day period of mourning following the
   assassination of President John F. Kennedy.

   Teddy Roosevelt banned the Christmas tree from the White House, possibly
   for environmental reasons—but his young son snuck a tree into the house
   anyway.

   In the first week, a tree in your home will consume as much as three
   quarts of water per day.

   Tinsel used to be made with lead foil, but in the early 1970s the U.S.
   Food and Drug Administration convinced manufacturers to switch to plastic
   tinsel.

   The best-selling Christmas trees include the Scotch Pine, Douglas Fir,
   Fraser Fir, Balsam Fir and Blue Spruce.

HISTORY Vault: The Christmas Truce

   By December 1914, all thoughts of a quick World War I victory had faded.
   But on Christmas Eve, an astonishing event took place: Up and down the
   Western Front, Allied and German soldiers met peacefully in No Man's Land.

   WATCH NOW

   By: History.com Editors

   HISTORY.com works with a wide range of writers and editors to create
   accurate and informative content. All articles are regularly reviewed and
   updated by the HISTORY.com team. Articles with the “HISTORY.com Editors”
   byline have been written or edited by the HISTORY.com editors, including
   Amanda Onion, Missy Sullivan, Matt Mullen and Christian Zapata.

     ----------------------------------------------------------------------

Citation Information

   Article Title
           History of Christmas Trees

   Author
           History.com Editors

   Website Name
           HISTORY

   URL
           https://www.history.com/topics/christmas/history-of-christmas-trees

   Date Accessed
           January 6, 2024

   Publisher
           A&E Television Networks

   Last Updated
           November 28, 2023

   Original Published Date
           November 28, 2023

Fact Check

   We strive for accuracy and fairness. But if you see something that doesn't
   look right, click here to contact us! HISTORY reviews and updates its
   content regularly to ensure it is complete and accurate.

   Print Page

Sign up for Inside History

   Get HISTORY’s most fascinating stories delivered to your inbox three times
   a week.

   _____________________ Sign Up

   By submitting your information, you agree to receive emails from HISTORY
   and A+E Networks. You can opt out at any time. You must be 16 years or
   older and a resident of the United States.

   More details: Privacy Notice | Terms of Use | Contact Us

   A+E NetworksOur Family of Brands
     * History Education
     * History Vault
     * Mobile/Apps
     * News
     * Shop
     * Share Your Opinion
   Follow History
     * d
     * e
     * p
     * m
     * +
     * * * * * * Biography
     * Crime and Investigation
     * History en Espanol
     * LRW
     * Military History
     * Ad Choices
     * Advertise With Us
     * Accessibility Support
     * Copyright Policy
     * Corporate Information
     * Employment Opportunities
     * FAQ/Contact Us
     * Privacy Notice
     * Cookie Notice
     * Terms Of Use
     * TV Parental Guidelines
     * * Contact Us
     * Copyright Policy
     * Privacy Policy
     * Terms of Use
     * Ad Choices
     * Accessibility Support
     * © 2024, A&E Television Networks, LLC. All Rights Reserved.
