   Link: canonical
   Link: shortlink
   [IMG]
     * HOME
     * NEWS
          * Election 2024
          * Government + Politics
          * Ag + Environment
          * Health Care
          * Justice
          * Education
     * COMMENTARY
     * ABOUT
     * SUBSCRIBE
     * DONATE
   [IMG]
     * Election 2024
     * Government + Politics
     * Ag + Environment
     * Health Care
     * Justice
     * Education

     * Ag + Environment
     * Criminal Justice + Policing

  Convicted tree thief’s ‘right to survive’ trumps Iowa law, his lawyer argues

        By: Jared Strong - January 2, 2024 6:56 pm

   [IMG]

   Jason Levant Ferguson of rural Rolfe is accused of stealing more than 100
   trees from state land. DNR officials said his property, shown here, had
   stolen logs plainly visible in the yard. (Photo by Jared Strong/Iowa
   Capital Dispatch)

   A northwest Iowa man had the right to cut down and take trees from a
   public wildlife management area because he needed the wood for shelter and
   heat, his attorney argues.

   That argument is part of Jason Lavant Ferguson’s repeated efforts to
   overrule a jury’s unanimous decision in November that found him guilty of
   felony theft and 50 timber violations.

   [IMG] Jason Levant Ferguson, 41, of Rolfe (Booking photo courtesy of
   Pocahontas County jail)

   The 41-year-old rural Rolfe man was accused of taking more than 100 trees
   from the Stoddard Wildlife Management Area in Pocahontas County without
   permission, including a slow-growing bur oak that was about six feet in
   diameter at its base.

   He is set to be sentenced Jan. 26 and faces up to five years in prison for
   the theft charge and one year apiece for each of the timber violations.

   A district court judge last month rejected Ferguson’s claims that an
   800-year-old English charter empowers him to take trees from public land
   and that he deserves a new trial. Subsequently, his attorney expanded on
   that claim and filed a motion in arrest of judgment, which asks a judge
   not to impose the jury’s verdict because it was made in error.

   “The defendant’s activities can be summarized as cutting wood to rebuild
   his home and heat his home so he didn’t die from hypothermia,” wrote
   Ferguson’s attorney, Kevin Fors, of Harcourt. “These are the very acts
   protected by the (Charter of the Forest) when given in 1215 and reaffirmed
   in the third version released in 1217 and ratified by later kings.”

   Ferguson told state conservation officers that he had planned to use some
   of the timber to build a house. In seeking a new trial, Ferguson had
   argued that the English charter’s provisions — which established rights of
   commoners to use public lands — are part of the United States’ unwritten
   “common law” that the country retained when it broke from England.

   But District Court Judge Derek Johnson decided last month that the charter
   applies to the forests of England, not the United States.

   Nevertheless, Ferguson’s attorney continues to insist that Americans have
   a fundamental right to harvest lumber and firewood from public land. He
   pointed to federal provisions that allow people to take trees from
   national parks under certain circumstances.

   “I am arguing in this time and in this place it is morally wrong and
   legally wrong to prosecute an individual for subsisting on forest products
   owned by the sovereign,” Fors wrote in his recent motion. “As a human
   right you have a right to survive even if it doesn’t conform to state
   imposed restrictions.”

   Ferguson was successful last year in defending himself against numerous
   felony drug and weapons charges that stemmed from the tree theft
   investigation. The judge decided that search warrants that uncovered
   evidence of marijuana and methamphetamine production at Ferguson’s
   property were improperly approved, and that the evidence could not be used
   to prosecute Ferguson.

   It’s unclear when the judge will rule on Fors’ recent arrested-judgment
   motion.

   Creative Commons License
   Republish

   Our stories may be republished online or in print under Creative Commons
   license CC BY-NC-ND 4.0. We ask that you edit only for style or to
   shorten, provide proper attribution and link to our web site. Please see
   our republishing guidelines for use of photos and graphics.

   Jared Strong

        Jared Strong

   Senior reporter Jared Strong has written about Iowans and the important
   issues that affect them for more than 15 years, previously for the Carroll
   Times Herald and the Des Moines Register.

   MORE FROM AUTHOR

    Related News

   Tree thefts: an uncommon crime on the rise in IowaTree thefts: an uncommon
   crime on the rise in Iowa by Jared Strong November 10, 2023
   Alleged tree thief claims protection by England's Charter of the
   ForestAlleged tree thief claims protection by England's Charter of… by
   Jared Strong December 11, 2023
   Data show which Iowa counties have (or don't have) representative
   juriesData show which Iowa counties have (or don't have)… by Laura Belin
   November 8, 2023

Community journalism for democracy

        Democracy Toolkit //

   Register to Vote | Find Your Precinct | Find Your State Legislator |
   Contact Your U.S. Representative | Contact Your U.S. Senator
     * DEMOCRACY TOOLKIT

   © Iowa Capital Dispatch, 2024

    ABOUT US

   Iowans value integrity in their government. Free and independent
   journalism is what keeps our public servants accountable and responsive to
   the people. That’s why Iowa Capital Dispatch, a nonprofit, independent
   source for quality journalism, is working every day to keep you informed
   about what government officials are doing with your money, your freedom
   and your safety.

   DEIJ Policy | Ethics Policy | Privacy Policy

   Our stories may be republished online or in print under Creative Commons
   license CC BY-NC-ND 4.0. We ask that you edit only for style or to
   shorten, provide proper attribution and link to our web site.

   DEIJ Policy | Ethics Policy | Privacy Policy
   © Iowa Capital Dispatch, 2024
